
This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
Fight Club
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Jump to navigationJump to search
This article is about the film. For the novel the film is based on, see Fight Club (novel). For other uses, see Fight Club (disambiguation).
Fight Club
"FIGHT CLUB" is embossed on a pink bar of soap in the upper right. Below are head-and-shoulders portraits of Brad Pitt facing the viewer with a broad smile and wearing a red leather jacket over a decorative blue t-shirt, and Edward Norton in a white button-up shirt with a tie and the top button loosened. Norton's body faces right and his head faces the viewer with little expression. Below the portraits are the two actors' names, followed by "HELENA BONHAM CARTER" in smaller print. Above the portraits is "MISCHIEF. MAYHEM. SOAP."
Theatrical release poster
Directed by	David Fincher
Produced by
Art Linson
Ceán Chaffin
Ross Grayson Bell
Screenplay by	Jim Uhls
Based on	Fight Club
by Chuck Palahniuk
Starring
Brad Pitt
Edward Norton
Helena Bonham Carter
Meat Loaf Aday
Jared Leto
Music by	The Dust Brothers
Cinematography	Jeff Cronenweth
Edited by	James Haygood
Production
company
Fox 2000 Pictures
Regency Enterprises
Linson Films
Distributed by	20th Century Fox
Release date
September 10, 1999 (Venice)
October 15, 1999 (United States)
Running time
139 minutes[1]
Country	United States[nb 1]
Language	English
Budget	$63 million[1]
Box office	$101.2 million[1]
Fight Club is a 1999 American film directed by David Fincher and starring Brad Pitt, Edward Norton, and Helena Bonham Carter. It is based on the 1996 novel of the same name by Chuck Palahniuk. Norton plays the unnamed narrator, who is discontented with his white-collar job. He forms a "fight club" with soap salesman Tyler Durden (Pitt), and becomes embroiled in a relationship with him and a destitute woman, Marla Singer (Bonham Carter).

Palahniuk's novel was optioned by Fox 2000 Pictures producer Laura Ziskin, who hired Jim Uhls to write the film adaptation. Fincher was selected because of his enthusiasm for the story. He developed the script with Uhls and sought screenwriting advice from the cast and others in the film industry. He and the cast compared the film to Rebel Without a Cause (1955) and The Graduate (1967), with a theme of conflict between Generation X and the value system of advertising.[4][5] Fincher used the homoerotic overtones of Palahniuk's novel to make audiences uncomfortable and keep them from anticipating the twist ending.[6]

Studio executives did not like the film, and they restructured Fincher's intended marketing campaign to try to reduce anticipated losses. Fight Club failed to meet the studio's expectations at the box office, and received polarized reactions from critics. It was cited as one of the most controversial and talked-about films of 1999. The Guardian saw it as an omen for change in American political life, and described its visual style as ground-breaking. The film later found commercial success with its DVD release, establishing Fight Club as a cult classic and causing media to revisit the film. On the tenth anniversary of the film's release, The New York Times dubbed it the "defining cult movie of our time."[7]


Contents
1	Plot
2	Cast
3	Themes
4	Production
4.1	Development
4.2	Casting
4.3	Writing
4.4	Filming
4.5	Cinematography
4.6	Visual effects
4.7	Score
5	Release
5.1	Marketing
5.2	Theatrical run
5.3	Home media
6	Critical reception
7	Cultural impact
8	See also
9	Notes
10	References
11	External links
Plot
The unnamed Narrator is an automobile recall specialist who is unfulfilled by his job and possessions. He finds catharsis by posing as a sufferer of testicular cancer and other afflictions in support groups, curing his insomnia. His bliss is disturbed by another impostor, Marla Singer. The two agree to split which groups they attend.

On a flight home from a business trip, the Narrator meets soap salesman Tyler Durden. The Narrator returns home to find that his apartment has been destroyed by an explosion. Deciding against asking Marla for help, he calls Tyler, and they meet at a bar. Tyler says the Narrator is beholden to consumerism. In the parking lot, he asks the Narrator to hit him, and they begin a fistfight.

The Narrator moves into Tyler's home, a large dilapidated house in an industrial area. They have further fights outside the bar, which attract growing crowds of men. The fights move to the bar's basement where the men form Fight Club, which routinely meets for the men to fight recreationally.

Marla overdoses on pills and telephones the Narrator for help; he ignores her, but Tyler goes to her apartment to save her. Tyler and Marla begin a sexual relationship, much to the Narrator's irritation. Tyler warns the Narrator never to talk to Marla about him. The Narrator blackmails his boss for his company's assets to support Fight Club and quits his job.

Soon, Fight Clubs begin to form across the country. Tyler recruits their members to a new anti-materialist and anti-corporate organization, Project Mayhem, without the Narrator's involvement. The group engages in subversive acts of vandalism and violence, increasingly troubling the Narrator. After the Narrator complains that Tyler has excluded him, Tyler leaves the house. The Narrator realizes that Tyler caused the explosion at his apartment.

When a member of Project Mayhem, Robert Paulson, is killed by the police during a botched sabotage operation, the Narrator tries to halt the project. He follows a paper trail to cities Tyler has visited. In one city, a Project Mayhem member addresses the Narrator as "Mr. Durden." Confused, the Narrator calls Marla and discovers that she also believes he is Tyler. Tyler appears in his hotel room and reveals that they are dissociated personalities in the same body; the Narrator assumed the personality of Tyler when he believed he was sleeping.

The Narrator blacks out. When he returns to the house, he uncovers Tyler's plans to erase debt by destroying buildings that contain credit card records. He apologizes to Marla and warns her that she is in danger, but she is tired of his contradictory behavior. He tries to warn the police, but the officers are members of the Project. He attempts to disarm the explosives in one building, but Tyler subdues him albeit the surveillance cameras display that Tyler is absent and that The Narrator is actually hurting himself. With Tyler holding him by gunpoint in the top floor, The Narrator realizes that, as he and Tyler are the same person, he is holding the gun. He fires it into his own mouth, shooting through his cheek, which causes Tyler to collapse since he thinks he has committed suicide. Project Mayhem members bring a kidnapped Marla to the building. Holding hands, the Narrator and Marla watch as the explosives detonate, collapsing buildings around them.

Cast
A Caucasian man with black hair and glasses. He is wearing a blazer and a shirt with the top button loosen.
A blond Caucasian man in a striped plaid shirt. He is smiling towards the camera.
Brad Pitt (left) in 2014 and Edward Norton (right) in 2012
Brad Pitt as Tyler Durden, a soap salesman that the Narrator meets on one of his business trips and becomes best friend of the Narrator until they open an underground fight club which Tyler quickly turns into a social anarchistic revolutionary society known as Project Mayhem.
Edward Norton as the Narrator, an unnamed traveling automobile recall specialist who suffers from insomnia. He adopts a number of nicknames, including "Jack", "Cornelius", "Rupert" and "Travis".
Helena Bonham Carter as Marla Singer, a woman whom the Narrator meets who also goes to support groups for catharsis.
Meat Loaf as Robert Paulson, a man whom the Narrator meets at the testicular cancer support group.
Jared Leto as Angel Face, a fight club recruit with a boyish appearance and personality included in missions for Project Mayhem.
Zach Grenier as Richard Chesler, The Narrator's boss.
Additional roles include: Thom Gossom Jr. as Detective Stern, a police investigator who looks into the Narrator's apartment explosion; Bob Stephenson as an airport security officer who detains the Narrator; Joon B. Kim as Raymond K. Hessel, a young convenience store clerk; Peter Iacangelo as Lou, an aggressive man who owns the bar fight club is held in; and David Andrews as Thomas, a member of the Narrator's testicular cancer support group. Tim de Zarn, Ezra Buzzington, and David Lee Smith appear as the Narrator's co-workers, and Richmond Arquette portrays his doctor.

Holt McCallany, Eion Bailey, Paul Carafotes, Mark Fite, and Michael Shamus Wiles portray members of Project Mayhem, and Stuart Blumberg and Matt Winston play people harassed by the group. Leonard Termo, Van Quattro, Markus Redmond, and Michael Girardin appear as members of law enforcement also involved in the fight club.

Themes
For academic interpretations of the film, see Interpretations of Fight Club.
We're designed to be hunters and we're in a society of shopping. There's nothing to kill anymore, there's nothing to fight, nothing to overcome, nothing to explore. In that societal emasculation this everyman [the Narrator] is created.
—David Fincher[8]
Director David Fincher said Fight Club is a coming of age film, like the 1967 film The Graduate but for people in their 30s. Fincher described the Narrator as an "everyman";[8] the character is identified in the script as "Jack", but left unnamed in the film.[9] Fincher outlined the Narrator's background: "He's tried to do everything he was taught to do, tried to fit into the world by becoming the thing he isn't." He cannot find happiness, so he travels on a path to enlightenment in which he must "kill" his parents, god, and teacher. By the start of the film, he has "killed off" his parents. With Tyler Durden, he kills his god by doing things they are not supposed to do. To complete the process of maturing, the Narrator has to kill his teacher, Tyler Durden.[10]

The character is a 1990s inverse of the Graduate archetype: "a guy who does not have a world of possibilities in front of him, he has no possibilities, he literally cannot imagine a way to change his life." He is confused and angry, so he responds to his environment by creating Tyler Durden, a Nietzschean Übermensch, in his mind. While Tyler is who the Narrator wants to be, he is not empathetic and does not help the Narrator face decisions in his life "that are complicated and have moral and ethical implications". Fincher explained: "[Tyler] can deal with the concepts of our lives in an idealistic fashion, but it doesn't have anything to do with the compromises of real life as modern man knows it. Which is: you're not really necessary to a lot of what's going on. It's built, it just needs to run now."[8] While studio executives worried that Fight Club was going to be "sinister and seditious", Fincher sought to make it "funny and seditious" by including humor to temper the sinister element.[11]

Screenwriter Jim Uhls described the film as a romantic comedy, explaining: "It has to do with the characters' attitudes toward a healthy relationship, which is a lot of behavior which seems unhealthy and harsh to each other, but in fact does work for them—because both characters are out on the edge psychologically."[12] The Narrator seeks intimacy, but avoids it with Marla Singer, seeing too much of himself in her.[13] While Marla is a seductive and negativist prospect for the Narrator, he embraces the novelty and excitement that comes with befriending Tyler. The Narrator is comfortable being personally connected to Tyler, but becomes jealous when Tyler becomes sexually involved with Marla. When the Narrator argues with Tyler about their friendship, Tyler tells him that being friends is secondary to pursuing the philosophy they have been exploring.[14] When Tyler implies that Marla is a risk they should remove, the Narrator realizes he should have focused on her and begins to diverge from Tyler's path.[13]

We decided early on that I would start to starve myself as the film went on, while [Brad Pitt] would lift and go to tanning beds; he would become more and more idealized as I wasted away.
—Edward Norton[15]
The Narrator, an unreliable narrator, is not immediately aware that he is mentally projecting Tyler.[16] He also mistakenly promotes the fight clubs as a way to feel powerful,[17] though the Narrator's physical condition worsens while Tyler Durden's appearance improves. While Tyler desires "real experiences" of actual fights like the Narrator at first,[18] he manifests a nihilistic attitude of rejecting and destroying institutions and value systems.[19] His impulsive nature, representing the id,[13] is seductive and liberating to the Narrator and the members of Project Mayhem. Tyler's initiatives and methods become dehumanizing;[19] he orders around the members of Project Mayhem with a megaphone similar to camp directors at Chinese re-education camps.[13] The Narrator pulls back from Tyler and arrives at a middle ground between his conflicting selves.[14]

Fight Club examines Generation X angst as '"the middle children of history".[5] Norton said it examines the value conflicts of Generation X as the first generation raised on television: this generation "its value system largely dictated to it by advertising culture", and was told one could achieve "spiritual happiness through home furnishing".[4][18] His character walks through his apartment while visual effects identify his many IKEA possessions. Fincher described the Narrator's immersion: "It was just the idea of living in this fraudulent idea of happiness."[20] Pitt said, "Fight Club is a metaphor for the need to push through the walls we put around ourselves and just go for it, so for the first time we can experience the pain."[21]

Fight Club also parallels the 1955 film Rebel Without a Cause; both probe the frustrations of the people in the system.[18] The characters, having undergone societal emasculation, are reduced to "a generation of spectators".[22] A culture of advertising defines society's "external signifiers of happiness", causing an unnecessary chase for material goods that replaces the more essential pursuit of spiritual happiness. The film references consumer products such as Gucci, Calvin Klein, and the Volkswagen New Beetle. Norton said of the Beetle, "We smash it ... because it seemed like the classic example of a Baby Boomer generation marketing plan that sold culture back to us."[23] Pitt explained the dissonance: "I think there's a self-defense mechanism that keeps my generation from having any real honest connection or commitment with our true feelings. We're rooting for ball teams, but we're not getting in there to play. We're so concerned with failure and success—like these two things are all that's going to sum you up at the end."[21]

The violence of the fight clubs serves not to promote or glorify combat, but for participants to experience feeling in a society where they are otherwise numb.[24] The fights represent a resistance to the impulse to be "cocooned" in society.[22] Norton believed the fighting strips away the "fear of pain" and "the reliance on material signifiers of their self-worth", leaving them to experience something valuable.[18] When the fights evolve into revolutionary violence, the film only half-accepts the revolutionary dialectic by Tyler Durden; the Narrator pulls back and rejects Durden's ideas.[14] Fight Club purposely shapes an ambiguous message whose interpretation is left to the audience.[19] Fincher said: "I love this idea that you can have fascism without offering any direction or solution. Isn't the point of fascism to say, 'This is the way we should be going'? But this movie couldn't be further from offering any kind of solution."[11]

Production
Development
The novel Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk was published in 1996. Before its publication, a Fox Searchlight Pictures book scout sent a galley proof of the novel to creative executive Kevin McCormick. The executive assigned a studio reader to review the proof as a candidate for a film adaptation, but the reader discouraged it. McCormick then forwarded the proof to producers Lawrence Bender and Art Linson, who also rejected it. Producers Josh Donen and Ross Bell saw potential and expressed interest. They arranged unpaid screen readings with actors to determine the script's length, and an initial reading lasted six hours. The producers cut out sections to reduce the running time, and they used the shorter script to record its dialogue. Bell sent the recording to Laura Ziskin, head of the division Fox 2000, who listened to the tape and purchased the rights to Fight Club from Palahniuk for $10,000.[25]

Ziskin initially considered hiring Buck Henry to write the adaptation, finding Fight Club similar to the 1967 film The Graduate, which Henry had adapted. When a new screenwriter, Jim Uhls, lobbied Donen and Bell for the job, the producers chose him over Henry. Bell contacted four directors to direct the film. He considered Peter Jackson the best choice, but Jackson was too busy filming the 1996 film The Frighteners in New Zealand. Bryan Singer received the book but did not read it. Danny Boyle met with Bell and read the book, but he pursued another film. David Fincher, who had read Fight Club and had tried to buy the rights himself, talked with Ziskin about directing the film. He hesitated to accept the assignment with 20th Century Fox at first because he had an unpleasant experience directing the 1992 film Alien 3 for the studio. To repair his relationship with the studio, he met with Ziskin and studio head Bill Mechanic.[25] In August 1997, 20th Century Fox announced that Fincher would direct the film adaptation of Fight Club.[26]

Casting
Producer Ross Bell met with actor Russell Crowe to discuss his candidacy for the role of Tyler Durden. Producer Art Linson, who joined the project late, met with Pitt regarding the same role. Linson was the senior producer of the two, so the studio sought to cast Pitt instead of Crowe.[25] Pitt was looking for a new film after the domestic failure of his 1998 film Meet Joe Black, and the studio believed Fight Club would be more commercially successful with a major star. The studio signed Pitt for US$17.5 million.[27]

For the role of the unnamed Narrator, the studio desired a "sexier marquee name" such as Matt Damon to increase the film's commercial prospects; it also considered Sean Penn. Fincher instead considered Norton based on his performance in the 1996 film The People vs. Larry Flynt.[28] Other studios were approaching Norton for leading roles in developing films like The Talented Mr. Ripley and Man on the Moon. He was cast in Runaway Jury, but the film did not reach production. 20th Century Fox offered Norton $2.5 million for Fight Club. He could not accept the offer immediately because he still owed Paramount Pictures a film; he had signed a contractual obligation with Paramount to appear in one of the studio's future films for a smaller salary. Norton later satisfied the obligation with his role in the 2003 film The Italian Job.[27]

In January 1998, 20th Century Fox announced that Pitt and Norton had been cast.[29] The actors prepared by taking lessons in boxing, taekwondo, grappling,[30] and soapmaking.[31] Pitt voluntarily visited a dentist to have pieces of his front teeth chipped off so his character would not have perfect teeth. The pieces were restored after filming concluded.[32]

Fincher's first choice for the role of Marla Singer was Janeane Garofalo, who objected to the film's sexual content.[33] The filmmakers considered Courtney Love and Winona Ryder as early candidates.[34] The studio wanted to cast Reese Witherspoon, but Fincher felt she was too young.[27] He chose to cast Bonham Carter based on her performance in the 1997 film The Wings of the Dove.[35]

Writing
Uhls started working on a draft of the adapted screenplay, which excluded a voice-over because the industry perceived at the time that the technique was "hackneyed and trite". When Fincher joined the film, he thought that the film should have a voice-over, believing that the film's humor came from the Narrator's voice.[27] He described the film without a voice-over as seemingly "sad and pathetic".[36] Fincher and Uhls revised the script for six to seven months and by 1997 had a third draft that reordered the story and left out several major elements. When Pitt was cast, he was concerned that his character, Tyler Durden, was too one-dimensional. Fincher sought the advice of writer-director Cameron Crowe, who suggested giving the character more ambiguity. Fincher also hired screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker for assistance. He invited Pitt and Norton to help revise the script, and the group drafted five revisions in the course of a year.[27]

Palahniuk praised the faithful film adaptation of his novel and applauded how the film's plot was more streamlined than the book's. Palahniuk recalled how the writers debated if film audiences would believe the plot twist from the novel. Fincher supported including the twist, arguing, "If they accept everything up to this point, they'll accept the plot twist. If they're still in the theater, they'll stay with it."[37] Palahniuk's novel also contained homoerotic overtones, which Fincher included in the film to make audiences uncomfortable and accentuate the surprise of the twists.[6] The bathroom scene where Tyler Durden bathes next to the Narrator is an example of the overtones; the line, "I'm wondering if another woman is really the answer we need," was meant to suggest personal responsibility rather than homosexuality.[13] Another example is the scene at the beginning of the film in which Tyler Durden puts a gun barrel down the Narrator's mouth.[38]

The Narrator finds redemption at the end of the film by rejecting Tyler Durden's dialectic, a path that diverged from the novel's ending in which the Narrator is placed in a mental institution.[11] Norton drew parallels between redemption in the film and redemption in The Graduate, indicating that the protagonists of both films find a middle ground between two divisions of self.[14] Fincher considered the novel too infatuated with Tyler Durden and changed the ending to move away from him: "I wanted people to love Tyler, but I also wanted them to be OK with his vanquishing."[11]

Filming
Studio executives Mechanic and Ziskin planned an initial budget of US$23 million to finance the film,[25] but by the start of production, the budget was increased to $50 million. Half was paid by New Regency, but during filming, the projected budget escalated to US$67 million. New Regency's head and Fight Club executive producer Arnon Milchan petitioned Fincher to reduce costs by at least US$5 million. Fincher refused, so Milchan threatened Mechanic that New Regency would withdraw financing. Mechanic sought to restore Milchan's support by sending him tapes of dailies from Fight Club. After seeing three weeks of filming, Milchan reinstated New Regency's financial backing.[39] The final production budget was $63 million.[1]

The fight scenes were heavily choreographed, but the actors were required to "go full out" to capture realistic effects such as having the wind knocked out of them.[21] Makeup artist Julie Pearce, who had worked for Fincher on the 1997 film The Game, studied mixed martial arts and pay-per-view boxing to portray the fighters accurately. She designed an extra's ear to have cartilage missing, inspired by the boxing match in which Mike Tyson bit off part of Evander Holyfield's ear.[40] Makeup artists devised two methods to create sweat on cue: spraying mineral water over a coat of Vaseline, and using the unadulterated water for "wet sweat". Meat Loaf, who plays a fight club member who has "bitch tits", wore a 90-pound (40 kg) fat harness that gave him large breasts.[30] He also wore eight-inch (20 cm) lifts in his scenes with Norton to be taller than him.[13]

Filming lasted 138 days,[41] during which Fincher shot more than 1,500 rolls of film, three times the average for a Hollywood film.[30] The locations were in and around Los Angeles, including the Promenade Towers, Melrose Avenue, St. Brendan's Catholic Church, and Michael Heizer's public art sculpture "North, South East, West". Sets were also built in Century City.[41] Production designer Alex McDowell constructed more than 70 sets.[30] The exterior of Tyler Durden's house was built in Wilmington, California,[42] while the interior was built on a sound stage at the studio's location. The interior was given a decayed look to illustrate the deconstructed world of the characters.[41] Marla Singer's apartment was based on photographs of apartments in downtown LA.[16] Overall, production included 300 scenes, 200 locations, and complex special effects. Fincher compared Fight Club to his subsequent, less complex film Panic Room: "I felt like I was spending all my time watching trucks being loaded and unloaded so I could shoot three lines of dialogue. There was far too much transportation going on."[43]

Cinematography
Fincher used the Super 35 format to film Fight Club since it gave him maximum flexibility to compose shots. He hired Jeff Cronenweth as cinematographer; Cronenweth's father Jordan Cronenweth had been cinematographer for Fincher's 1992 film Alien 3, but left midway through production due to Parkinson's disease. Fincher explored visual styles in his previous films Seven and The Game, and he and Cronenweth drew elements from these styles for Fight Club.[41]

Fincher and Cronenweth applied a lurid style, choosing to make people "sort of shiny".[16] The appearance of the Narrator's scenes without Tyler were bland and realistic. The scenes with Tyler were described by Fincher as "more hyper-real in a torn-down, deconstructed sense—a visual metaphor of what [the Narrator is] heading into". The filmmakers used heavily desaturated colors in the costuming, makeup, and art direction.[41] Bonham Carter wore opalescent makeup to portray her romantic nihilistic character with a "smack-fiend patina". Fincher and Cronenweth drew influences from the 1973 film American Graffiti, which applied a mundane look to nighttime exteriors while simultaneously including a variety of colors.[16]

The crew took advantage of both natural and practical light. Fincher sought various approaches to the lighting setups; for example, he chose several urban locations for the city lights' effects on the shots' backgrounds. The crew also embraced fluorescent lighting at other practical locations to maintain an element of reality and to light the prostheses depicting the characters' injuries.[41] On the other hand, Fincher also ensured that scenes were not so strongly lit so the characters' eyes were less visible, citing cinematographer Gordon Willis' technique as the influence.[13]

Fight Club was filmed mostly at night, and Fincher filmed the daytime shots in shadowed locations. The crew equipped the bar's basement with inexpensive work lamps to create a background glow. Fincher avoided stylish camerawork when filming early fight scenes in the basement and instead placed the camera in a fixed position. In later fight scenes, Fincher moved the camera from the viewpoint of a distant observer to that of the fighter.[41]

The scenes with Tyler were staged to conceal that the character was a mental projection of the unnamed Narrator. Tyler was not filmed in two shots with a group of people, nor was he shown in any over-the-shoulder shots in scenes where Tyler gives the Narrator specific ideas to manipulate him. In scenes before the Narrator meets Tyler, the filmmakers inserted Tyler's presence in single frames for subliminal effect.[16] Tyler appears in the background and out of focus, like a "little devil on the shoulder".[13] Fincher explained the subliminal frames: "Our hero is creating Tyler Durden in his own mind, so at this point he exists only on the periphery of the Narrator's consciousness."[44]

While Cronenweth generally rated and exposed the Kodak film stock normally on Fight Club, several other techniques were applied to change its appearance. Flashing was implemented on much of the exterior night photography, the contrast was stretched to be purposely ugly, the print was adjusted to be underexposed, Technicolor's ENR silver retention was used on a select number of prints to increase the density of the blacks, and high-contrast print stocks were chosen to create a "stepped-on" look on the print with a dirty patina.[16]

Visual effects
Fincher hired visual effects supervisor Kevin Tod Haug, who worked for him on The Game, to create visual effects for Fight Club. Haug assigned the visual effects artists and experts to different facilities that each addressed different types of visual effects: CG modeling, animation, compositing, and scanning. Haug explained, "We selected the best people for each aspect of the effects work, then coordinated their efforts. In this way, we never had to play to a facility's weakness." Fincher visualized the Narrator's perspective through a "mind's eye" view and structured a myopic framework for the film audiences. Fincher also used previsualized footage of challenging main-unit and visual effects shots as a problem-solving tool to avoid making mistakes during the actual filming.[44]

Blue and rough-looking tendrils stretch into a vanishing point in the middle; tendrils on the right side are visible, where the rest are obscured in darkness. Blue specks of matter float in the image. In front of the vanishing point are the words "Fight Club".
The opening scene in Fight Club that represents a brain's neural network in which the thought processes are initiated by the Narrator's fear impulse. The network was mapped using an L-system and drawn out by a medical illustrator.
The film's title sequence is a 90-second visual effects composition that depicts the inside of the Narrator's brain at a microscopic level; the camera pulls back to the outside, starting at his fear center and following the thought processes initiated by his fear impulse.[45] The sequence, designed in part by Fincher, was budgeted separately from the rest of the film at first, but the sequence was awarded by the studio in January 1999.[44] Fincher hired Digital Domain and its visual effects supervisor Kevin Mack, who won an Academy Award for Visual Effects for the 1998 film What Dreams May Come, for the sequence. The company mapped the computer-generated brain using an L-system,[46] and the design was detailed using renderings by medical illustrator Katherine Jones. The pullback sequence from within the brain to the outside of the skull included neurons, action potentials, and a hair follicle. Haug explained the artistic license that Fincher took with the shot, "While he wanted to keep the brain passage looking like electron microscope photography, that look had to be coupled with the feel of a night dive—wet, scary, and with a low depth of field." The shallow depth of field was accomplished with the ray tracing process.[44]

Other visual effects include an early scene in which the camera flashes past city streets to survey Project Mayhem's destructive equipment lying in underground parking lots; the sequence was a three-dimensional composition of nearly 100 photographs of Los Angeles and Century City by photographer Michael Douglas Middleton. The final scene of the demolition of the credit card office buildings was designed by Richard Baily of Image Savant; Baily worked on the scene for over fourteen months.[44]

Midway through the film, Tyler Durden points out the cue mark—nicknamed "cigarette burn" in the film—to the audience. The scene represents a turning point that foreshadows the coming rupture and inversion of the "fairly subjective reality" that existed earlier in the film. Fincher explained: "Suddenly it's as though the projectionist missed the changeover, the viewers have to start looking at the movie in a whole new way."[44]

Score
Fincher was concerned that bands experienced in writing film scores would be unable to tie the themes together, so he sought a band which had never recorded for film. He pursued Radiohead,[13] but singer Thom Yorke declined as he was recovering from the stress of promoting their album OK Computer.[47] Fincher instead commissioned the breakbeat producing duo Dust Brothers, who created a post-modern score encompassing drum loops, electronic scratches, and computerized samples. Dust Brothers performer Michael Simpson explained the setup: "Fincher wanted to break new ground with everything about the movie, and a nontraditional score helped achieve that."[48] The climax and end credits feature the song "Where Is My Mind?" by the Pixies.[49]

Release
Marketing
Filming concluded in December 1998, and Fincher edited the footage in early 1999 to prepare Fight Club for a screening with senior executives. They did not receive the film positively and were concerned that there would not be an audience for the film.[50] Executive producer Art Linson, who supported the film, recalled the response: "So many incidences of Fight Club were alarming, no group of executives could narrow them down."[51] Nevertheless, Fight Club was originally slated to be released in July 1999[52] but was later changed to August 6, 1999. The studio further delayed the film's release, this time to autumn, citing a crowded summer schedule and a hurried post-production process.[53] Outsiders attributed the delays to the Columbine High School massacre earlier in the year.[54]

Marketing executives at Fox Searchlight Pictures faced difficulties in marketing Fight Club and at one point considered marketing it as an art film. They considered that the film was primarily geared toward male audiences because of its violence and believed that not even Pitt would attract female filmgoers. Research testing showed that the film appealed to teenagers. Fincher refused to let the posters and trailers focus on Pitt and encouraged the studio to hire the advertising firm Wieden+Kennedy to devise a marketing plan. The firm proposed a bar of pink soap with the title "Fight Club" embossed on it as the film's main marketing image; the proposal was considered "a bad joke" by Fox executives. Fincher also released two early trailers in the form of fake public service announcements presented by Pitt and Norton; the studio did not think the trailers marketed the film appropriately. Instead, the studio financed a $20 million large-scale campaign to provide a press junket, posters, billboards, and trailers for TV that highlighted the film's fight scenes. The studio advertised Fight Club on cable during World Wrestling Federation broadcasts, which Fincher protested, believing that the placement created the wrong context for the film.[50] Linson believed that the "ill-conceived one-dimensional" marketing by marketing executive Robert Harper largely contributed to Fight Club's lukewarm box office performance in the United States.[55]

Theatrical run
The studio held Fight Club's world premiere at the 56th Venice International Film Festival on September 10, 1999.[56][57] For the American theatrical release, the studio hired the National Research Group to test screen the film; the group predicted the film would gross between US$13 million and US$15 million in its opening weekend.[58] Fight Club opened commercially in the United States and Canada on October 15, 1999 and earned US$11,035,485 in 1,963 theaters over the opening weekend.[1] The film ranked first at the weekend box office, defeating Double Jeopardy and The Story of Us, a fellow weekend opener.[59] Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B-" on an A+ to F scale.[60] The gender mix of audiences for Fight Club, argued to be "the ultimate anti-date flick", was 61% male and 39% female; 58% of audiences were below the age of 21. Despite the film's top placement, its opening gross fell short of the studio's expectations.[61] Over the second weekend, Fight Club dropped 42.6% in revenue, earning US$6,335,870.[62] Against its production budget of US$63 million, the film grossed US$37 million from its theatrical run in the United States and Canada and earned US$100.9 million in theaters worldwide.[1] The underwhelming North American performance of Fight Club soured the relationship between 20th Century Fox's studio head Bill Mechanic and media executive Rupert Murdoch, which contributed to Mechanic's resignation in June 2000.[63]

The British Board of Film Classification reviewed Fight Club for its November 12, 1999 release in the United Kingdom and removed two scenes involving "an indulgence in the excitement of beating a (defenseless) man's face into a pulp". The board assigned the film an 18 certificate, limiting the release to adult-only audiences in the UK. The BBFC did not censor any further, considering and dismissing claims that Fight Club contained "dangerously instructive information" and could "encourage anti-social (behavior)". The board decided, "The film as a whole is—quite clearly—critical and sharply parodic of the amateur fascism which in part it portrays. Its central theme of male machismo (and the anti-social behaviour that flows from it) is emphatically rejected by the central character in the concluding reels."[64] The scenes were restored in a two-disc DVD edition released in the UK in March 2007.[65]

Home media
Fincher supervised the composition of the DVD packaging and was one of the first directors to participate in a film's transition to home media. The film was released in two DVD editions.[66][dead link] The single-disc edition included a commentary track,[67] while the two-disc special edition included the commentary track, behind-the-scenes clips, deleted scenes, trailers, fake public service announcements, the promotional music video "This is Your Life", Internet spots, still galleries, cast biographies, storyboards, and publicity materials.[68] Fincher worked on the DVD as a way to finish his vision for the film. Julie Markell, 20th Century Fox's senior vice president of creative development, said the DVD packaging complemented Fincher's vision: "The film is meant to make you question. The package, by extension, tries to reflect an experience that you must experience for yourself. The more you look at it, the more you'll get out of it." The studio developed the packaging for two months.[69] The two-disc special edition DVD was packaged to look covered in brown cardboard wrapper. The title "Fight Club" was labeled diagonally across the front, and packaging appeared tied with twine. Markell said, "We wanted the package to be simple on the outside, so that there would be a dichotomy between the simplicity of brown paper wrapping and the intensity and chaos of what's inside."[69] Deborah Mitchell, 20th Century Fox's vice president of marketing, described the design: "From a retail standpoint, [the DVD case] has incredible shelf-presence."[70]

Fight Club won the 2000 Online Film Critics Society Awards for Best DVD, Best DVD Commentary, and Best DVD Special Features.[71] Entertainment Weekly ranked the film's two-disc edition in first place on its 2001 list of "The 50 Essential DVDs", giving top ratings to the DVD's content and technical picture-and-audio quality.[72] When the two-disc edition went out of print, the studio re-released it in 2004 because of fans' requests.[73] The film sold more than 6 million copies on DVD and video within the first ten years,[74] making it one of the largest-selling home media items in the studio's history,[55] in addition to grossing over $55 million in video and DVD rentals.[75][dead link] With a weak box office performance in the United States and Canada, a better performance in other territories, and the highly successful DVD release, Fight Club generated a US$10 million profit for the studio.[55]

The Laserdisc edition was only released in Japan on May 26, 2000[76] and features a different cover art, as well as one of the very few Dolby EX soundtracks released on LD. The VHS edition was released on October 31, 2002, as a part of 20th Century Fox's "Premiere Series" line. It includes a featurette after the film, "Behind the Brawl".[77]

Fight Club was released in the Blu-ray Disc format in the United States on November 17, 2009.[78] Five graffiti artists were commissioned to create 30 pieces of art for the packaging, encompassing urban aesthetics found on the East Coast and West Coast of the United States as well as influences from European street art.[79] The Blu-ray edition opens with a menu screen for the romantic comedy Never Been Kissed starring Drew Barrymore before leading into the Fight Club menu screen. Fincher got permission from Barrymore to include the fake menu screen.[80]

Critical reception
When Fight Club premiered at the 56th Venice International Film Festival, the film was fiercely debated by critics. A newspaper reported, "Many loved and hated it in equal measures." Some critics expressed concern that the film would incite copycat behavior, such as that seen after A Clockwork Orange debuted in Britain nearly three decades previously.[81] Upon the film's theatrical release, The Times reported the reaction: "It touched a nerve in the male psyche that was debated in newspapers across the world."[82] Although the film's makers called Fight Club "an accurate portrayal of men in the 1990s," some critics called it "irresponsible and appalling". Writing for the Australian newspaper, Christopher Goodwin stated: "Fight Club is shaping up to be the most contentious mainstream Hollywood meditation on violence since Stanley Kubrick's A Clockwork Orange."[83]

Janet Maslin, reviewing for The New York Times, praised Fincher's direction and editing of the film. She wrote that Fight Club carried a message of "contemporary manhood", and that, if not watched closely, the film could be misconstrued as an endorsement of violence and nihilism.[84] Roger Ebert, reviewing for the Chicago Sun-Times, called Fight Club "visceral and hard-edged", but also "a thrill ride masquerading as philosophy", whose promising first act is followed by a second that panders to macho sensibilities and a third he dismissed as "trickery".[85] Ebert later acknowledged that the film was "beloved by most, not by me".[86] He was later requested to have a shot-by-shot analysis of Fight Club at the Conference on World Affairs; he stated that "[s]eeing it over the course of a week, I admired its skill even more, and its thought even less."[87] Jay Carr of The Boston Globe opined that the film began with an "invigoratingly nervy and imaginative buzz", but that it eventually became "explosively silly".[88] Newsweek's David Ansen described Fight Club as "an outrageous mixture of brilliant technique, puerile philosophizing, trenchant satire and sensory overload" and thought that the ending was too pretentious.[89] Richard Schickel of Time described the mise en scène as dark and damp: "It enforces the contrast between the sterilities of his characters' aboveground life and their underground one. Water, even when it's polluted, is the source of life; blood, even when it's carelessly spilled, is the symbol of life being fully lived. To put his point simply: it's better to be wet than dry." Schickel applauded the performances of Pitt and Norton, but criticized the "conventionally gimmicky" unfolding and the failure to make Bonham Carter's character interesting.[90]

Cineaste's Gary Crowdus reviewed the critical reception in retrospect: "Many critics praised Fight Club, hailing it as one of the most exciting, original, and thought-provoking films of the year." He wrote of the negative opinion, "While Fight Club had numerous critical champions, the film's critical attackers were far more vocal, a negative chorus which became hysterical about what they felt to be the excessively graphic scenes of fisticuffs ... They felt such scenes served only as a mindless glamorization of brutality, a morally irresponsible portrayal, which they feared might encourage impressionable young male viewers to set up their own real-life fight clubs in order to beat each other senseless."[91]

Fight Club was nominated for the 2000 Academy Award for Best Sound Editing, but it lost to The Matrix.[92] Bonham Carter won the 2000 Empire Award for Best British Actress.[93] The Online Film Critics Society also nominated Fight Club for Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor (Norton), Best Editing, and Best Adapted Screenplay (Uhls).[94] Though the film won none of the awards, the organization listed Fight Club as one of the top ten films of 1999.[95] The soundtrack was nominated for a BRIT Award, losing to Notting Hill.[96]

On Rotten Tomatoes, Fight Club holds a rating of 79%, based on 167 reviews, with an average rating of 7.35/10. The site's consensus reads, "Solid acting, amazing direction, and elaborate production design make Fight Club a wild ride."[97] On Metacritic, the film has a score of 66 out of 100, based on 35 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".[98]

Cultural impact
Fight Club was one of the most controversial and talked-about films of the 1990s.[21][99] The film was perceived as the forerunner of a new mood in American political life. Like other 1999 films Magnolia, Being John Malkovich, and Three Kings, Fight Club was recognized as an innovator in cinematic form and style since it exploited new developments in filmmaking technology.[100] After Fight Club's theatrical release, it became more popular via word of mouth,[101] and the positive reception of the DVD established it as a cult film that David Ansen of Newsweek conjectured would enjoy "perennial" fame.[102][103] The film's success also heightened Palahniuk's profile to global renown.[104]

Following Fight Club's release, several fight clubs were reported to have started in the United States. A "Gentleman's Fight Club" was started in Menlo Park, California in 2000 and had members mostly from the tech industry.[105] Teens and preteens in Texas, New Jersey, Washington state, and Alaska also initiated fight clubs and posted videos of their fights online, leading authorities to break up the clubs. In 2006, an unwilling participant from a local high school was injured at a fight club in Arlington, Texas, and the DVD sales of the fight led to the arrest of six teenagers.[106] An unsanctioned fight club was also started at Princeton University, where matches were held on campus.[107] The film was suspected of influencing Luke Helder, a college student who planted pipe bombs in mailboxes in 2002. Helder's goal was to create a smiley pattern on the map of the United States, similar to the scene in Fight Club in which a building is vandalized to have a smiley on its exterior.[108] On July 16, 2009, a 17-year-old who had formed his own fight club in Manhattan was charged with detonating a homemade bomb outside a Starbucks Coffee shop in the Upper East Side. The New York City Police Department reported the suspect was trying to emulate "Project Mayhem".[109] In September 2015, two employees at Lightbridge Academy, a New Jersey daycare center, were charged with instigating "Fight Club–style" brawls between children aged four to six years of age. The fights were reportedly filmed and uploaded to Snapchat, a video messaging application, and involved approximately a "dozen boys and girls". In the videos, one of the perpetrators, Erica Kenny, can be heard making references to Fight Club.[110] The charges stem from an incident that occurred on August 13, 2015, but investigators are looking into whether the fights were ongoing.[111]

A video game adaptation of the film, titled Fight Club, was released by Vivendi in 2004 for the PlayStation 2, Xbox, and for mobile phones. The game was a critical and commercial failure, and was panned by such publications and websites as GameSpot, Game Informer, and IGN.[112][113][114]

In 2003, Fight Club was listed as one of the "50 Best Guy Movies of All Time" by Men's Journal.[115] In 2006 and 2008, Fight Club was voted by Empire readers as the eighth and tenth greatest film of all time, respectively.[116][117] Total Film ranked Fight Club as "The Greatest Film of our Lifetime" in 2007 during the magazine's tenth anniversary.[118] In 2007, Premiere selected Tyler Durden's line, "The first rule of fight club is you do not talk about fight club," as the 27th greatest movie line of all time.[119] In 2008, readers of Empire ranked Tyler Durden eighth on a list of the 100 Greatest Movie Characters.[120] Empire also identified Fight Club as the 10th greatest movie of all time in its 2008 issue The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.[121]

In 2010, two viral mash-up videos featuring Fight Club were released. Ferris Club was a mash-up of Fight Club and the 1986 film Ferris Bueller's Day Off. It portrayed Ferris as Tyler Durden and Cameron as the narrator, "claiming to see the real psychological truth behind the John Hughes classic".[122] The second video Jane Austen's Fight Club also gained popularity online as a mash-up of Fight Club's fighting rules and the characters created by 19th century novelist Jane Austen.[123]

See also
flag	United States portal
	Film portal
List of American films of 1999
Notes
 Fight Club, a film by the American studio 20th Century Fox, is often found in databases and related summaries to have the countries US and Germany, the latter being ascribable to the role of international funding.[2][3]
References
 "Fight Club (1999)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 11, 2019.
 "Fight Club (1999)". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
 "Fight Club – Detail view of Movies Page". American Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
 Sragow, Michael (April 19, 1999). "'Fight Club': 'A Weird Catcher in the Rye'". CNN. Archived from the original on December 6, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2017.
 Laist, Randy (March 12, 2015). "Cinema of Simulation: Hyperreal Hollywood in the Long 1990s". Bloomsbury Publishing. Retrieved April 30, 2017.
 Hobson, Louis B. (October 10, 1999). "Fiction for real". Calgary Sun.
 Lim, Dennis (November 6, 2009). "Forget Rule No. 1: Still Talking About 'Fight Club'". The New York Times. Retrieved July 24, 2019.
 Smith 1999, p. 64
 "100 DVDs You Must Own". Empire. January 2003. p. 31.
 Smith 1999, p. 60
 Wise, Damon (December 1999). "Menace II Society". Empire.
 Sragow, Michael (October 14, 1999). "Testosterama". Salon.com. Archived from the original on December 9, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 Fight Club DVD commentary featuring David Fincher, Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, [2000], 20th Century Fox.
 Teasdall, Barbara (1999). "Edward Norton Fights His Way to the Top". Reel.com. Movie Gallery. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved March 24, 2007.
 Said, S.F. (April 19, 2003). "It's the thought that counts". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on April 30, 2012. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
 Smith 1999, p. 65
 O'Connor, Robby (October 8, 1999). "Interview with Edward Norton". Yale Herald.
 Schaefer, Stephen (October 1999). "Brad Pitt & Edward Norton". MrShowbiz.com. ABC News Internet Ventures. Archived from the original on April 17, 2001. Retrieved March 26, 2007.
 Fuller, Graham; Eidelman, D; Thomson, JG (November 1999). "Fighting Talk". Interview. Vol. 24 no. 5. pp. 1071–7.
 Smith 1999, p. 67
 "'Club' fighting for a respectful place in life". Post-Tribune. March 15, 2001.
 Hobson, Louis B. (October 10, 1999). "Get ready to rumble". Calgary Sun.
 Slotek, Jim (October 10, 1999). "Cruisin' for a bruisin'". Toronto Sun.
 Moses, Michael (1999). "Fighting Words: An interview with Fight Club director David Fincher". DrDrew.com. Dr. Drew. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved May 13, 2009.
 Waxman 2005, pp. 137–151
 Fleming, Michael (August 19, 1997). "Thornton holds reins of 'Horses'". Variety. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 Waxman 2005, pp. 175–184
 Biskind, Peter (August 1999). "Extreme Norton". Vanity Fair.
 Petrikin, Chris (January 7, 1998). "Studio Report Card: Fox". Variety. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 Garrett, Stephen (July 1999). "Freeze Frame". Details.
 Schneller, Johanna (August 1999). "Brad Pitt and Edward Norton make 'Fight Club'". Premiere.
 Nashawaty, Chris (July 16, 1998). "Brad Pitt loses his teeth for a "Fight"". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 "The Story Behind Fight Club". Total Film. November 20, 2009. Archived from the original on February 20, 2010. Retrieved May 11, 2010. The studio wanted Winona Ryder. Fincher wanted Garofalo, but she was "uncomfortable with the idea of all this sex".
 "Palahniuk: Marketing 'Fight Club' is 'the ultimate absurd joke'". CNN. October 29, 1999. Archived from the original on February 5, 2007. Retrieved March 26, 2007.
 Johnson, Richard (November 1999). "Boxing Helena". Los Angeles Magazine.
 Smith 1999, p. 61
 Kleinman, Geoffrey. "Interview With Fight Club Author Chuck Palahniuk". DVD Talk. Archived from the original on January 23, 2009. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 Schaefer, Stephen (October 13, 1999). "Fight Club's Controversial Cut". MrShowbiz.com. ABC News Internet Ventures. Archived from the original on April 16, 2001. Retrieved December 2, 2007.
 Waxman 2005, pp. 199–202
 "It Bruiser: Julie Pearce". Entertainment Weekly. July 25, 1999.
 Probst 1999
 Wayne, Gary J. (c. 2013). "Filming Locations of Fight Club (Part 1)". Seeing Stars in Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 31, 2013. Retrieved June 13, 2013.
 Covert, Colin (March 29, 2002). "Fear factor is Fincher's forte". Star Tribune.
 Martin, Kevin H. (January 2000). "A World of Hurt". Cinefex. Archived from the original on February 27, 2004.
 Smith 1999, pp. 61–62
 Frauenfelder, Mark (August 1999). "Hollywood's Head Case". Wired.
 Trendell, Andrew (October 3, 2018). "Thom Yorke on how he nearly wrote the soundtrack for Fight Club". NME. Retrieved October 4, 2018.
 Schurr, Amanda (November 19, 1999). "Score one for musicians turned film composers". Sarasota Herald-Tribune.
 Spitz, Marc (September 2004). "Life to the Pixies". Spin. p. 77. "[Kim] Deal: I think [that last scene in] Fight Club got 'Where Is My Mind?' popular. I don't know how people know our music now. For some reason, over the decade we got popular."
 Waxman 2005, pp. 253–273
 Linson 2002, p. 152
 Svetkey, Benjamin (October 15, 1999). "Blood, Sweat, and Fears". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 19, 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
 Klady, Leonard (June 17, 1999). "Fox holds the 'Fight' to fall". Variety. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 Goodwin, Christopher (September 19, 1999). "The malaise of the American male". The Sunday Times. UK.
 Linson 2002, p. 155
 "'Fight Club' gets Venice premiere". Associated Press via Lubbock Avalanche-Journal. September 11, 1999. Archived from the original on February 16, 2015. Retrieved February 16, 2015.
 Gristwood, Sarah (September 14, 1999). "Fury of fists". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on January 7, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2009.
 Orwall, Bruce (October 25, 1999). "L.A. Confidential: Studios Move to Put A Halt on Issuing Box-Office Estimates". Wall Street Journal.
 "Weekend Box Office Results for October 15–17, 1999". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 7, 2006. Retrieved November 14, 2006.
 "Cinemascore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018.
 Hayes, Dade (October 18, 1999). "'Jeopardy' just barely". Variety. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 "Weekend Box Office Results for October 22–24, 1999". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 1, 2007. Retrieved November 14, 2006.
 Lyman, Rick (June 26, 2000). "Media Talk; Changes at Fox Studio End Pax Hollywood". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2007.
 Dawtrey, Adam (November 9, 1999). "UK to cut 'Club'". Variety. Retrieved November 30, 2019.
 French, Philip (March 4, 2007). "Fight Club". The Observer. UK. Archived from the original on October 2, 2014. Retrieved March 30, 2007.
 Kirsner, Scott (April 23, 2007). "How DVDs became a success". Variety. Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007.
 "Fight Club". foxstore.com. 20th Century Fox. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 "Fight Club Special Edition". foxstore.com. 20th Century Fox. Archived from the original on December 7, 2008. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 Misek, Marla (November 2001). "For Fight Club and Seven, package makes perfect". EMedia Magazine. Vol. 14 no. 11. pp. 27–28.
 Wilson, Wendy (June 12, 2000). "Fox's Fight Club delivers knockout package, promo". Video Business.
 "The OFCS 2000 Year End Awards". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on March 5, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 "The 50 Essential DVDs". Entertainment Weekly. January 19, 2001. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 Cole, Ron (February 14, 2004). "Don't let Kurt Russell classic escape you". Battle Creek Enquirer. Gannett Company.
 Lim, Dennis (November 6, 2009). "'Fight Club' Fight Goes On". The New York Times. The New York Times Company. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2013.
 Bing, Jonathan (April 11, 2001). "'Fight Club' author books pair of deals". Variety. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved May 1, 2007.
 "Fight Club [PILF-2835]". Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved August 29, 2013.
 Fincher, David (director) (2000). Fight Club (motion picture (video tape)). Beverly Hills, Calif.: Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment. OCLC 45259209.
 Ault, Susanne (September 18, 2009). "PHYSICAL: Fox packaging reflects film's anti-establishment themes". Video Business. Archived from the original on September 25, 2009. Retrieved October 11, 2009.
 Bradner, Liesl (September 12, 2009). "'Fight Club' hits the streets again, 10 years after the first punch". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 18, 2009. Retrieved October 15, 2009.
 Villarreal, Phil (November 18, 2009). "Fight Club Blu-ray Messes With Viewers". The Consumerist. Archived from the original on December 19, 2009. Retrieved November 19, 2009.
 Gritten, David (September 14, 1999). "Premiere of Fight Club leaves critics slugging it out in Venice". The Ottawa Citizen.
 Christopher, James (September 13, 2001). "How was it for you?". The Times. UK.
 Goodwin, Christopher (September 24, 1999). "The beaten generation". The Australian.
 Maslin, Janet (October 15, 1999). "Film Review; Such a Very Long Way From Duvets to Danger". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 7, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
 Ebert, Roger (October 15, 1999). "Fight Club". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on April 5, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 Ebert, Roger (August 24, 2007). "Zodiac". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on May 22, 2008. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
 Ebert, Roger (2003). The Great Movies (Reprint ed.). Broadway Books. p. xvi. ISBN 978-0767910385. Archived from the original on January 18, 2016. Retrieved January 6, 2016.
 Carr, Jay (October 15, 1999). "'Fight Club' packs a punch but lacks stamina". Boston Globe.
 Ansen, David (October 18, 1999). "A Fistful of Darkness". Newsweek.
 Schickel, Richard (October 11, 1999). "Conditional Knockout". Time. Archived from the original on January 22, 2008. Retrieved January 7, 2008.
 Crowdus, Gary (September 2000). "Getting Exercised Over Fight Club". Cineaste. Vol. 25 no. 4. pp. 46–48.
 Hawker, Philippa (March 28, 2000). "Oscar 2000 – Shocking? Not!". The Age. Australia.
 "Sony Ericsson Empire Awards – 2000 Winners". Empire. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved March 23, 2007.
 "1999 Year-End Award Nominees". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on March 5, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007.
 "The OFCS 1999 Year End Awards". Online Film Critics Society. Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on April 19, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007.
 "Brits 2000: The winners". BBC News. BBC News. March 3, 2000. Archived from the original on March 8, 2008. Retrieved April 16, 2007.
 "Fight Club review". Rottentomatoes.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
 "Fight Club Reviews". Metacritic. October 15, 1999. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016.
 "'Fight Club' author Palahniuk to participate in academic conference at Edinboro University". Erie Times-News. March 26, 2001.
 Pulver, Andrew (November 27, 2004). "Personality crisis: David Fincher's Fight Club (1999)". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on May 7, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2008.
 Wise, Damon (November 2, 2000). "Now you see it". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2008.
 Nunziata, Nick (March 23, 2004). "The personality of cult". CNN. Archived from the original on December 8, 2007. Retrieved April 1, 2007.
 Ansen, David (July 11, 2005). "Is Anybody Making Movies We'll Actually Watch In 50 Years?". Newsweek.
 Flynn, Bob (March 29, 2007). "Fighting talk". The Independent. UK.
 "Fight club draws techies for bloody underground beatdowns". USA Today. Associated Press. May 29, 2006. Archived from the original on April 29, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007.
 Rosenstein, Bruce (August 1, 2006). "Illegal, violent teen fight clubs face police crackdown". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 27, 2007. Retrieved April 28, 2007.
 "At Princeton, no punches pulled". The Philadelphia Inquirer. June 6, 2001.
 Rossi, C. T. (June 10, 2002). "Father Absence Key to Male Masculinity Crisis". Insight on the News. News World Communications.
 "Starbucks bombing blamed on 'Fight Club' fancy". The Washington Times. Associated Press. July 16, 2009. Archived from the original on July 18, 2009. Retrieved July 18, 2009.
 DeGregory, Priscilla (09-01-2015). "Day care workers charged with running toddler 'Fight Club'". www.nypost.com. Archived from the original on September 2, 2015. Retrieved 09-02-2015. Check date values in: |access-date=, |date= (help)
 Bolton, Doug (9-2-2015). "Two women arrested over alleged child 'fight club' at a New Jersey nursery", www.independent.co.uk, Retrieved 09-03-2015.
 Kasavin, Greg (November 11, 2004). "Fight Club Review (PS2, Xbox)". GameSpot. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016.
 Ryckert, Dan (April 2011). "Top Ten Fighting Games We'd Like to Forget". Game Informer (216).
 Perry, Douglass C. (November 15, 2004). "Fight Club (PS2, Xbox)". IGN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016.
 Dirks, Tim. "50 Best Guy Movies of All Time". Filmsite. AMC. Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2009.
 "The 100 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire. January 30, 2004. p. 96.
 "The 201 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire. January 2006. p. 98.
 "Ten Greatest Films of the Past Decade". Total Film: 98. April 2007.
 "The 100 Greatest Movie Lines". Premiere. Archived from the original on November 14, 2007. Retrieved May 13, 2009.
 "The 100 Greatest Movie Characters – 8. Tyler Durden". Empire. Archived from the original on May 16, 2011. Retrieved December 1, 2008.
 "Empire's 500 Greatest Movies of All Time". Empire. Archived from the original on November 1, 2013. Retrieved January 3, 2014.
 Chivers, Tom (July 26, 2010). "Jane Austen's Fight Club is viral web video hit". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on August 12, 2010. Retrieved October 19, 2010.
 Staskiewicz, Keith (July 30, 2010). "I am Jane's pinching corset: We talk to the creator of 'Jane Austen's Fight Club'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 4, 2010. Retrieved August 5, 2010.
Linson, Art (May 2002). "Fight Clubbed". What Just Happened? Bitter Hollywood Tales from the Front Line. Bloomsbury USA. pp. 141–156. ISBN 978-1-58234-240-5.
Probst, Christopher (November 1999). "Anarchy in the U.S.A". American Cinematographer. 80 (11): 42–44+. Archived from the original on May 24, 2009. Retrieved July 19, 2009.
Smith, Gavin (September–October 1999). "Inside Out: Gavin Smith Goes One-on-One with David Fincher". Film Comment. 35 (5): 58–62, 65, 67–68. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015.
Waxman, Sharon (December 2005). Rebels on the Backlot: Six Maverick Directors and How They Conquered the Hollywood Studio System. HarperEntertainment. ISBN 978-0-06-054017-3.
External links
	Wikiquote has quotations related to: Fight Club
Official website at the Wayback Machine (archived October 16, 2004) (Requires Adobe Flash Player)
Fight Club on IMDb
Fight Club at AllMovie
Fight Club at Rotten Tomatoes
Fight Club at Metacritic
Fight Club at Box Office Mojo
Fight Club at Fox Movies
vte
Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk
vte
Films directed by David Fincher
vte
Works by Chuck Palahniuk
Authority control Edit this at Wikidata
BNF: cb16657385s (data)GND: 7569656-3SUDOC: 143346849VIAF: 316752084WorldCat Identities (via VIAF): 316752084
Categories: 1999 filmsEnglish-language films1990s drama filmsAmerican filmsAmerican satirical filmsAmerican drama filmsAmerican black comedy filmsDissociative identity disorder in filmsFilms about terrorismFilms based on American novelsFilms shot in Los AngelesFiction with unreliable narratorsFilms directed by David Fincher20th Century Fox filmsRegency Enterprises filmsFictional secret societiesFilms with screenplays by Jim UhlsAmerican neo-noir filmsUnderground fighting films
Navigation menu
Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog inArticleTalkReadEditView historySearch
Search Wikipedia
Main page
Contents
Featured content
Current events
Random article
Donate to Wikipedia
Wikipedia store
Interaction
Help
About Wikipedia
Community portal
Recent changes
Contact page
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Upload file
Special pages
Permanent link
Page information
Wikidata item
Cite this page
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons
Wikiquote
Print/export
Create a book
Download as PDF
Printable version

Languages
বাংলা
Español
Galego
Latviešu
മലയാളം
नेपाली
ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
Русский
中文
52 more
Edit links
This page was last edited on 30 November 2019, at 17:44 (UTC).
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.
Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersStatisticsCookie statementMobile viewWikimedia FoundationPowered by MediaWiki
